Return-Path: <xen-devel-bounces@lists.xenproject.org>
X-Original-To: lists+xen-devel@lfdr.de
Delivered-To: lists+xen-devel@lfdr.de
Received: from lists.xenproject.org (lists.xenproject.org [192.237.175.120])
	by mail.lfdr.de (Postfix) with ESMTPS id 09716423100
	for <lists+xen-devel@lfdr.de>; Tue,  5 Oct 2021 21:49:28 +0200 (CEST)
Received: from list by lists.xenproject.org with outflank-mailman.202473.357421 (Exim 4.92)
	(envelope-from <xen-devel-bounces@lists.xenproject.org>)
	id 1mXqR0-0004oV-8i; Tue, 05 Oct 2021 19:49:06 +0000
X-Outflank-Mailman: Message body and most headers restored to incoming version
Received: by outflank-mailman (output) from mailman id 202473.357421; Tue, 05 Oct 2021 19:49:06 +0000
Received: from localhost ([127.0.0.1] helo=lists.xenproject.org)
	by lists.xenproject.org with esmtp (Exim 4.92)
	(envelope-from <xen-devel-bounces@lists.xenproject.org>)
	id 1mXqR0-0004m9-5V; Tue, 05 Oct 2021 19:49:06 +0000
Received: by outflank-mailman (input) for mailman id 202473;
 Tue, 05 Oct 2021 19:49:05 +0000
Received: from us1-rack-iad1.inumbo.com ([172.99.69.81])
 by lists.xenproject.org with esmtp (Exim 4.92) (envelope-from
 <SRS0=kL3v=OZ=gmail.com=olekstysh@srs-us1.protection.inumbo.net>)
 id 1mXqQz-0004m3-B4
 for xen-devel@lists.xenproject.org; Tue, 05 Oct 2021 19:49:05 +0000
Received: from mail-lf1-x136.google.com (unknown [2a00:1450:4864:20::136])
 by us1-rack-iad1.inumbo.com (Halon) with ESMTPS
 id 04bef19e-f03b-4353-aa1d-95aa9adf4ba2;
 Tue, 05 Oct 2021 19:49:03 +0000 (UTC)
Received: by mail-lf1-x136.google.com with SMTP id u18so474268lfd.12
 for <xen-devel@lists.xenproject.org>; Tue, 05 Oct 2021 12:49:03 -0700 (PDT)
Received: from [192.168.1.7] ([212.22.223.21])
 by smtp.gmail.com with ESMTPSA id a11sm2053407lfo.5.2021.10.05.12.49.01
 (version=TLS1_3 cipher=TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256 bits=128/128);
 Tue, 05 Oct 2021 12:49:02 -0700 (PDT)
X-BeenThere: xen-devel@lists.xenproject.org
List-Id: Xen developer discussion <xen-devel.lists.xenproject.org>
List-Unsubscribe: <https://lists.xenproject.org/mailman/options/xen-devel>,
 <mailto:xen-devel-request@lists.xenproject.org?subject=unsubscribe>
List-Post: <mailto:xen-devel@lists.xenproject.org>
List-Help: <mailto:xen-devel-request@lists.xenproject.org?subject=help>
List-Subscribe: <https://lists.xenproject.org/mailman/listinfo/xen-devel>,
 <mailto:xen-devel-request@lists.xenproject.org?subject=subscribe>
Errors-To: xen-devel-bounces@lists.xenproject.org
Precedence: list
Sender: "Xen-devel" <xen-devel-bounces@lists.xenproject.org>
X-Inumbo-ID: 04bef19e-f03b-4353-aa1d-95aa9adf4ba2
DKIM-Signature: v=1; a=rsa-sha256; c=relaxed/relaxed;
        d=gmail.com; s=20210112;
        h=subject:to:cc:references:from:message-id:date:user-agent
         :mime-version:in-reply-to:content-transfer-encoding:content-language;
        bh=oMK54/16mBkwKiFyvSXTk51BEZvTZPD8UUz0Oc5ptB4=;
        b=Li1dIFEbH90MjW3j0l/fG/ggwGkhlCHge4Yp3XaAvHsBXB0NgMNJwVlHYCARvi8wBD
         BLiBVJpNdt791r+Zi7TnSNUxsX4P55vMAC528U1fW1h8M42OXHK2CcQlqVmV6tcE2y6e
         sdwGUqTkovYcY1viLUYRhO9ePmT1DsA5PzPuE78Pm+N9aGhMcTVWJzh2ml0qEcjswImf
         FuximTPIg2YY7N4DTR/M3Q+ITIFoIv8+nr6aExdwgypKRzO89m0K4WzIUyfXSLkm1aDg
         o2NB5qBij+ApG/63s5ogvxa9IIDamy0etgwDMqEMVAwG+oyDFfgN2xpszvm2i2IO4vAK
         /E0Q==
X-Google-DKIM-Signature: v=1; a=rsa-sha256; c=relaxed/relaxed;
        d=1e100.net; s=20210112;
        h=x-gm-message-state:subject:to:cc:references:from:message-id:date
         :user-agent:mime-version:in-reply-to:content-transfer-encoding
         :content-language;
        bh=oMK54/16mBkwKiFyvSXTk51BEZvTZPD8UUz0Oc5ptB4=;
        b=6SbenD80FhNstgVXDLYKZH0f7HiiUlHwWFgvYtY1rf8h6eKVdMeflwDwcEBBxSwqrX
         FUrkiG2h2oM15ihb+p0ZKzR6aXQeYhGPdu0HoImTs6AvsJZqadIWWrV/1fPN1/gm6Pru
         bW1jPmupcBFf3EVoZ50w9SYoqVS8ni1THmxBnQr2yJwXYWhWNn6zRQuH5JVIv5ffKb6x
         WBOWK1hWAOKTQk+27J9LMjHGluM4+1egpeoOXdnkafzpCHPdG8ZzC1ANQDZox1NA7CTM
         2gde1qU2JXdbdz1flJUz0+NvuJukGT3/2F/BBG6aL2T0S73Oev5Iw28cxJSVRmVB2L28
         VkTQ==
X-Gm-Message-State: AOAM530GD1N+++c+Ma5ryBPBqz8LEndEAOT99LL9DRS/ullsJN6lPjZS
	mMO6etZeCQMSrXtPK0h6BxM=
X-Google-Smtp-Source: ABdhPJy9Xw4zczTR1O1LA9pC182hMbl65+8nFq/tE4bbhhJjd/MiZqrMDmIgtuzB4OpbfZv9SiAO5Q==
X-Received: by 2002:a05:6512:d2:: with SMTP id c18mr5527180lfp.484.1633463342663;
        Tue, 05 Oct 2021 12:49:02 -0700 (PDT)
Subject: Re: [PATCH V4 1/3] xen: Introduce "gpaddr_bits" field to
 XEN_SYSCTL_physinfo
To: Stefano Stabellini <sstabellini@kernel.org>
Cc: Julien Grall <julien.grall.oss@gmail.com>, Jan Beulich
 <jbeulich@suse.com>, xen-devel <xen-devel@lists.xenproject.org>,
 Oleksandr Tyshchenko <oleksandr_tyshchenko@epam.com>,
 Ian Jackson <iwj@xenproject.org>, Wei Liu <wl@xen.org>,
 Anthony PERARD <anthony.perard@citrix.com>,
 Andrew Cooper <andrew.cooper3@citrix.com>,
 George Dunlap <george.dunlap@citrix.com>, Juergen Gross <jgross@suse.com>,
 Volodymyr Babchuk <Volodymyr_Babchuk@epam.com>,
 =?UTF-8?Q?Roger_Pau_Monn=c3=a9?= <roger.pau@citrix.com>,
 Bertrand Marquis <Bertrand.Marquis@arm.com>
References: <1632955927-27911-1-git-send-email-olekstysh@gmail.com>
 <1632955927-27911-2-git-send-email-olekstysh@gmail.com>
 <alpine.DEB.2.21.2109301600060.3209@sstabellini-ThinkPad-T480s>
 <05b040b0-a069-47a1-1f5e-85be62fa35f3@suse.com>
 <bbbceae1-c382-5e48-0c6b-fbb23fc720f5@gmail.com>
 <alpine.DEB.2.21.2110011244000.3209@sstabellini-ThinkPad-T480s>
 <CAJ=z9a2bT4tMn2argJzePUMR2Ke4bmabj+j5QevvwpfnA9ST_w@mail.gmail.com>
 <093bc1d5-bf6a-da0a-78b5-7a8dd471a063@gmail.com>
 <alpine.DEB.2.21.2110041411100.3209@sstabellini-ThinkPad-T480s>
From: Oleksandr <olekstysh@gmail.com>
Message-ID: <cdc5a5ef-950f-622b-a0c0-4ec03535ab55@gmail.com>
Date: Tue, 5 Oct 2021 22:49:01 +0300
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (X11; Linux x86_64; rv:68.0) Gecko/20100101
 Thunderbird/68.10.0
MIME-Version: 1.0
In-Reply-To: <alpine.DEB.2.21.2110041411100.3209@sstabellini-ThinkPad-T480s>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8; format=flowed
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit
Content-Language: en-US


On 05.10.21 00:11, Stefano Stabellini wrote:

Hi Stefano

> On Sat, 2 Oct 2021, Oleksandr wrote:
>> On 02.10.21 10:35, Julien Grall wrote:
>>
>> Thank you for your comments!
>>
>>        Hi
>>
>>        On Sat, 2 Oct 2021, 01:24 Stefano Stabellini, <sstabellini@kernel.org> wrote:
>>        Bertrand, see comment on ID_AA64MMFR0_EL1 below, any ideas?
>>
>>
>>        On Fri, 1 Oct 2021, Oleksandr wrote:
>>        > On 01.10.21 10:50, Jan Beulich wrote:
>>        > > On 01.10.2021 01:00, Stefano Stabellini wrote:
>>        > > > On Thu, 30 Sep 2021, Oleksandr Tyshchenko wrote:
>>        > > > > From: Oleksandr Tyshchenko <oleksandr_tyshchenko@epam.com>
>>        > > > >
>>        > > > > We need to pass info about maximum supported guest address
>>        > > > > space size to the toolstack on Arm in order to properly
>>        > > > > calculate the base and size of the extended region (safe range)
>>        > > > > for the guest. The extended region is unused address space which
>>        > > > > could be safely used by domain for foreign/grant mappings on Arm.
>>        > > > > The extended region itself will be handled by the subsequents
>>        > > > > patch.
>>        > > > >
>>        > > > > Use p2m_ipa_bits variable on Arm, the x86 equivalent is
>>        > > > > hap_paddr_bits.
>>        > > > >
>>        > > > > As we change the size of structure bump the interface version.
>>        > > > >
>>        > > > > Suggested-by: Julien Grall <jgrall@amazon.com>
>>        > > > > Signed-off-by: Oleksandr Tyshchenko <oleksandr_tyshchenko@epam.com>
>>        > > > > Reviewed-by: Michal Orzel <michal.orzel@arm.com>
>>        > > > Reviewed-by: Stefano Stabellini <sstabellini@kernel.org>
>>        > > I have to admit that I'm a little puzzled to see these R-b-s when ...
>>        > >
>>        > > > > Please note, that review comments for the RFC version [1] haven't been
>>        > > > > addressed yet.
>>        > > > > It is not forgotten, some clarification is needed. It will be addressed
>>        > > > > for the next version.
>>        > > > >
>>        > > > > [1]
>>        > > > > https://lore.kernel.org/xen-devel/973f5344-aa10-3ad6-ff02-ad5f358ad279@citrix.com/
>>        > > ... Oleksandr makes clear this patch isn't really ready yet.
>>        >
>>        > Unfortunately, this is true. I am still waiting for the clarification [1]
>>
>>        Although I was aware of comments to older versions, this is actually the
>>        first version of this patch that I reviewed with any level of details; I
>>        didn't read previous comments very closely. I tried to find any bugs or
>>        problems with it and I couldn't see any, so I gave my reviewed-by. I
>>        should have clarified that was meant for the ARM part as I don't have a
>>        full understanding of the implications of using hap_paddr_bits on x86
>>        for VM migration.
>>
>>
>>
>>        But let me take this opportunity to say that although I think the
>>        hypercall is OK, I wish we didn't need this patch at all: it is
>>        problematic because it touches tools, x86 and ARM hypervisor code all
>>        together. It needs at least three acks/reviewed-by to get accepted: from
>>        an x86 maintainer, an arm maintainer and from a tools maintainer. I
>>        don't say this to criticize the patch acceptance process: this patch
>>        makes changes to an existing hypercall so it is only fair that it needs
>>        to go through extra levels of scrutiny. For the sake of simplicity and
>>        decoupling (reducing dependencies between patches and between
>>        components), I think it would be best to introduce an #define for the
>>        minimum value of gpaddr_bits and then move this patch at the end of the
>>        series; that way it becomes optional.
>>
>>
>> It depends what you mean by optional. Yes we can add hack to avoid the hypercall... But the more scalable solution is the hypercall.
>>
>> I am slightly concerned that if we don't push for the hypercall now, then there will be no incentive to do it afterwards...
>>
>> So I went through Andrew's e-mail to understand what's the request. I understand that there are some problem with migration. But it
>> doesn't look like we need to solve them now. Instead,Â  AFAICT, his main ask for this series is to switch to a domctl.
>>
>> It seems the conversation is simply stuck on waiting for Andrew to provide details on what would look like. Did we ping Andrew on
>> IRC?
>>
>>        Unfortunately the minimum value
>>        is 32 (in practice I have never seen less than 40 but the architecture
>>        supports 32 as minimum).
>>
>>
>>
>>        Actually, the info we are looking for is already exposed via
>>        ID_AA64MMFR0_EL1. ID_AA64MMFR0_EL1 can be read from a virtual machine,
>>        and Linux let userspace read it [1]. Regardless of this patch series, we
>>        should make sure that Xen exposes the right mm64.pa_range value to guest
>>        virtual machines. If that is done right, then you can just add support
>>        for reading ID_AA64MMFR0_EL1 in libxl/libxc and then we don't need any
>>        hypercall modifications changes.
>>
>>
>>  From my understanding, from a VM PoV "pa_range" should represent the size of the guest physical address space.
>>
>> Today, it happens that every VM is using the same P2M size. However, I would rather not make such assumption in the userspace.
>>
>>
>>        So, in theory we already have all the interfaces we need, but in
>>        practice they don't work: unfortunaly both Xen and Linux mark
>>        ID_AA64MMFR0_EL1 as FTR_HIDDEN in cpufeature.c so neither Linux from
>>        Xen, not userspace from Linux can actually read the real value :-/
>>        They always read zero.
>>
>>        (Also I think we have an issue today with p2m_restrict_ipa_bits not
>>        updating the mm64.pa_range value. I think that it should be fixed.)
>>
>>
>> It looks like it. That should be handled in a separate patch though.
>>
>>
>>        Bertrand, do you have any ideas in regards to ID_AA64MMFR0_EL1?
>>
>>        If not, maybe we could just go with
>>        #define MIN_GPADDR_BITS 32.
>>
>>
>> The toolstack would have to consider it as the "maximum" because it may not be safe to expose anything above.
>>
>> With 32, we are going to be limited in term of space we can find.
>>
>> We could potentially use 40 bits as a minimum. Although it still feels a bit of a hack to me given that the IOMMU may restrict it
>> further and the architecture can in theory support less.
>>
>> Overall, I still strongly prefer the hypercall approach. If a common one is difficult to achieve, then we can extend the domctl to
>> create a domain to provide the p2m_bits (in the same way as we deal for the GIC version) in an arch specific way.
>>
>>
>> To summarize:
>> If we don't query the hypervisor to provide gpaddr_bits we have two options:
>> - The safe option is to use minimum possible value which is 32 bits on Arm64. But, there would be of no practical use.
>> - The unsafe option is to use let's say "default" 40 bits and pray it will work in all cases on Arm64 (it is ok on Arm32).
>>
>> So we definitely need to query the hypervisor. As it turned out the sysctl approach is not welcome, in the long term we want to have this
>> information per domain. I have been absolutely OK with that valid ask since RFC, I just wanted to know what was the preferred way to do
>> this (new domctl, existing, etc)...
>>
>> I analyzed what Julien had suggested regarding pass gpaddr_bits via Arm's struct xen_arch_domainconfig (I assume, this should be an OUT
>> parameter) and I think it makes sense. Taking into the account that the feature freeze date is coming, I will wait a few days, and if there
>> are no objections I will send updated version (patch #3 also needs updating as it expects the gpaddr_bits to be in physinfo).
>
> No objections from me, I think Julien's suggestion is a good one.

ok, great. I have already implemented/tested that.


Thank you.


-- 
Regards,

Oleksandr Tyshchenko


